
=for latex

\parskip 2mm

=end

=head0 *Preamble

This book does not intend to be a complete reference to all modules
from CPAN, nor a complete reference to some modules from
CPAN. That would be mostly impossible to print, as there are thousands
of Perl modules available, and some of them have rather long
documentation.

That said, B<< this book aims to introduce a set of useful modules and
frameworks >> that are not easy to learn just by reading the main
Module documentation file (the one you usually get when executing
C<perldoc Module> on the command line). Do not expect that all
features are presented. The more important were chosen, and for
further details you should read each module documentation.

The book is split in different chapters, each one covering a specific
type of modules or frameworks. For instance, we have a chapter on web
frameworks, and a chapter on XML parsers. For each chapter you will
get a brief explanation or comparison between the modules that will be
described, together with the reason why those modules where
chosen. Then, each section will focus in one of those modules. And the
chapter ends with a special section, where pointers to other useful
modules that were not discussed but might be useful.

When writing this book we tried to make it possible to be read in any
order: you can peek at a chapter about a topic you are interested in, and
read it without reading all the other chapters. We even tried to make
sections independent, so you can read a section on a specific
framework without needing to read the sections for the other
frameworks. Nevertheless, it might be a good idea to read the
introduction to that chapter before reading a specific section.

If you are new to Perl or to using modules from CPAN we suggest you
start by reading our first chapter. It presents some of the history
about CPAN, how it works, who contributes code, how you can install
modules from CPAN in your computer and where you can get information
on how to contribute to CPAN.

Regarding previous knowledge on Perl or CPAN, we expect you to know
how to write basic Perl programs, including the use of modules and
references. The knowledge about I<old> Object Oriented Perl might be
useful as well.

The authors would like to thank
Pedro Melo,
Marcos Ramos,
Sawyer X,
and
Magda Joana Silva
for they comments, suggestions and proofreading.

Also, this book wouldn't be possible without LaTeX and the
C<Pod::PseudoPod::LaTeX> Perl module from chromatic and Moritz.

=begin right

I<the authors>

=end right

=for latex

\parskip 0mm
\tableofcontents
\mainmatter
\parskip 2mm
\pagestyle{fancy}

=end

=cut

## Local Variables:
##  ispell-local-dictionary: "english"
##  mode: flyspell
## End:
